Understanding Quality of Experience Parameters
==============================================
.. sectionauthor:: Clément Delzotti, Vincent Higginson

.. We discuss the various parameters that must be taken into account while analyzing user experience over a specific network situation.

The ability of a network system to fulfil the communication needs of a human or another entity can be analysed and scored via various metrics. As these metrics for given systems are often compared between them, the concept of quality emerges. A system is of better quality when it performs better than another. The whole purpose of this chapter is to understand how this performance metric is performed, what was taken into account when deciding this system is of better quality.

At the day of writing, there are two types of quality often covered. The first one is computed with numbers in mind: Quality of Service or QoS. Quality of Service is based on network metrics such as bandwidth, low latency, … The ease of deployment is quite evident as it doesn’t require advanced techniques and the comparison between networks is easily made with mathematical comparison. The previous chapter talked about packets sniffing using a carefully configured router. Each packet transiting on our edge was opened and analysed. Said metrics arising from the characteristics of a network (hardware or software) are reflected through latency, rtt, bandwidth and other data. Conclusions concerning the performance/quality of network A comparing to network B are straightforward and discussed previously (a higher latency, a lower bandwidth, more lost packets, etc).

The second type of quality is a bit least obvious. Indeed, with the constantly increasing demand of services from users and other entities, heterogeneous environments, instability of networks, the concept of Quality of Experience (QoE) arises. QoE intervenes in situation where QoS isn’t relevant to study in details. Such situations can be mobile networks where performance is simply limited by a cost, by the bandwidth. Some other cases considered more conventional may be investigated with a QoE approach, this includes Wi-Fi with its known discomfort regarding distance and stability. Quality of Experience is based on “human” metrics. Which means it’s directly linked and influenced by the high user experience. Giving a value to this QoE isn’t trivial and requires strong standards to be compared between system.

A more precise example may help our dear readers differentiate QoS and QoE. The following page will dive into YouTube’s techniques to ensure a proper experience for the user (no stalling, high resolution, low startup time, etc) without requiring unattainable networks characteristics (described by QoS).